.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/rfc.md, before:

---
name: RFC Template
about: A design RFC for Zebra
title: ''
labels: C-design
assignees: ''

---

<!--
This template is for design RFCs.

The RFC process is documented in CONTRIBUTING.md.

Please see the checklist there: https://zebra.zfnd.org/CONTRIBUTING.html
-->


### Summary

Please copy the RFC summary over here. 

### More information

Feature Name: `my_feature`

Start Date: YYYY-MM-DD

Design PR: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/0000)

Zebra Issue: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/issues/0000)

### Document

<!--
Fill this in, replacing:

ZcashFoundation/zebra with username/repo (if not making the PR from the Zebra repo)
my-branch-name with the PR branch
xxxx-my-feature with the filename of the RFC

-->
[Rendered](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/blob/my-branch-name/book/src/dev/rfcs/drafts/xxxx-my-feature.md).

## Zebra Team Approval

Everyone on the Zebra team should review design RFCs:

- [ ] @dconnolly
- [ ] @oxarbitrage
- [ ] @teor2345

Commit message:

Update GitHub and RFC templates based on retrospectives (#2242)
Updates:
- GitHub Issue templates
- GitHub PR templates
- RFC template

Focusing on:
- consensus rule / network reference sections
- design sections
- review/test checklist

Process changes:
- add new team members to RFC approval
- change RFC approval to "most of the team"

And general cleanup:
- delete docs from the checklist, because we now `warn(missing_docs)`
- shorter explanations
- consistent headings
- consistent order
- consistent formatting

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/rfc.md, after:

---
name: RFC Template
about: A design RFC for Zebra
title: ''
labels: C-design
assignees: ''
---

<!--
This template is for design RFCs.
Please see the checklist in: https://zebra.zfnd.org/CONTRIBUTING.html
-->

## RFC Summary

**Please copy the RFC summary here.**

### Context

**Please copy the RFC header here.**

Feature Name: `my_feature`

Start Date: YYYY-MM-DD

Design PR: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/0000)

Zebra Issue: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/issues/0000)

### Rendered

<!--
Replace:
ZcashFoundation/zebra with username/repo (if not making the PR from the Zebra repo)
my-branch-name with the PR branch
xxxx-my-feature with the filename of the RFC
-->
[Rendered](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/blob/my-branch-name/book/src/dev/rfcs/drafts/xxxx-my-feature.md).

## Zebra Team Approval

Most of the Zebra team should review design RFCs:

- [ ] @conradoplg
- [ ] @dconnolly
- [ ] @oxarbitrage
- [ ] @jvff
- [ ] @mpguerra
- [ ] @teor2345
