book/src/user/metrics.md, before:

# Zebra Metrics

Zebra has support for Prometheus, configured using the [`MetricsSection`][metrics_section].

This requires supporting infrastructure to collect and visualize metrics, for example:

1. Create the `zebrad.toml` file with the following contents:
   ```
   [metrics]
   endpoint_addr = "127.0.0.1:9999"
   ```

2. Run Zebra, and specify the path to the `zebrad.toml` file, for example:
   ```
   zebrad -c zebrad.toml start
   ```

3. Install and run Prometheus and Grafana via Docker:

   ```
   # create a storage volume for grafana (once)
   sudo docker volume create grafana-storage
   # create a storage volume for prometheus (once)
   sudo docker volume create prometheus-storage

   # run prometheus with the included config
   sudo docker run --detach --network host --volume prometheus-storage:/prometheus --volume /path/to/zebra/prometheus.yaml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml  prom/prometheus

   # run grafana
   sudo docker run --detach --network host --env GF_SERVER_HTTP_PORT=3030 --env GF_SERVER_HTTP_ADDR=localhost --volume grafana-storage:/var/lib/grafana grafana/grafana
   ```

   Now the grafana dashboard is available at [http://localhost:3030](http://localhost:3030) ; the default username and password is `admin`/`admin`.
   Prometheus scrapes Zebra on `localhost:9999`, and provides the results on `localhost:9090`.

4. Configure Grafana with a Prometheus HTTP Data Source, using Zebra's `metrics.endpoint_addr`.

   In the grafana dashboard:
   1. Create a new Prometheus Data Source `Prometheus-Zebra`
   2. Enter the HTTP URL: `127.0.0.1:9090`
   3. Save the configuration

5. Now you can add the grafana dashboards from `zebra/grafana` (Create > Import > Upload JSON File), or create your own.

[metrics_section]: https://doc.zebra.zfnd.org/zebrad/config/struct.MetricsSection.html

Commit message:

breaking(diagnostics): make zebrad diagnostics into optional compile-time features (#4539)
* Disable the flamegraph feature by default at compile time

* Disable the journald feature by default at compile time

* Also disable inferno dependency, and rearrange features

* Disable the prometheus feature by default at compile time

* Disable the tracing filter reload feature by default at compile time

* Disable tests when corresponding features are disabled

* Add compile-time tracing features to user docs

* Add compile-time features to the metrics user docs

* Document diagnostics as part of the start command tasks and services

* breaking(diagnostics): rename "enable-sentry" feature to "sentry" (#4623)

* Also skip conflict tests when those ports are disabled

* breaking(diagnostics): rename "enable-sentry" feature to "sentry"

This is mostly:
```sh
fastmod enable-sentry sentry
```

Co-authored-by: mergify[bot] <37929162+mergify[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

book/src/user/metrics.md, after:

# Zebra Metrics

Zebra has support for Prometheus, configured using the `prometheus` compile-time feature,
and the [`MetricsSection`][metrics_section] runtime configuration.

This requires supporting infrastructure to collect and visualize metrics, for example:

1. Create the `zebrad.toml` file with the following contents:
   ```
   [metrics]
   endpoint_addr = "127.0.0.1:9999"
   ```

2. Run Zebra, and specify the path to the `zebrad.toml` file, for example:
   ```
   zebrad -c zebrad.toml start
   ```

3. Install and run Prometheus and Grafana via Docker:

   ```
   # create a storage volume for grafana (once)
   sudo docker volume create grafana-storage
   # create a storage volume for prometheus (once)
   sudo docker volume create prometheus-storage

   # run prometheus with the included config
   sudo docker run --detach --network host --volume prometheus-storage:/prometheus --volume /path/to/zebra/prometheus.yaml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml  prom/prometheus

   # run grafana
   sudo docker run --detach --network host --env GF_SERVER_HTTP_PORT=3030 --env GF_SERVER_HTTP_ADDR=localhost --volume grafana-storage:/var/lib/grafana grafana/grafana
   ```

   Now the grafana dashboard is available at [http://localhost:3030](http://localhost:3030) ; the default username and password is `admin`/`admin`.
   Prometheus scrapes Zebra on `localhost:9999`, and provides the results on `localhost:9090`.

4. Configure Grafana with a Prometheus HTTP Data Source, using Zebra's `metrics.endpoint_addr`.

   In the grafana dashboard:
   1. Create a new Prometheus Data Source `Prometheus-Zebra`
   2. Enter the HTTP URL: `127.0.0.1:9090`
   3. Save the configuration

5. Now you can add the grafana dashboards from `zebra/grafana` (Create > Import > Upload JSON File), or create your own.

[metrics_section]: https://doc.zebra.zfnd.org/zebrad/config/struct.MetricsSection.html
