book/src/user/regtest.md, before:

# Regtest with Zebra

The Regtest network in Zebra enables testing of custom functionalities in a private Testnet environment with configurable network upgrade activation heights. It allows for starting an isolated node which won't connect to any peers and currently allows for committing blocks without validating their Proof of Work (in the future, it may use a very low target difficulty and easier Equihash parameters instead of skipping Proof of Work validation altogether).

Zebra always activates the Canopy network upgrade at block height 1 due to limitations on its block construction.

## Usage

In order to use Regtest, Zebra must be configured to run on the Regtest network. The `[mining]` section is also necessary for mining blocks, and the `[rpc]` section is necessary for using the `send_raw_transaction` RPC method to mine non-coinbase transactions onto the chain.

Relevant parts of the configuration file:

```toml
[mining]
miner_address = 't27eWDgjFYJGVXmzrXeVjnb5J3uXDM9xH9v'

[network]
network = "Regtest"

# This section may be omitted when testing only Canopy
[network.testnet_parameters.activation_heights]
# Configured activation heights must be greater than or equal to 1,
# block height 0 is reserved for the Genesis network upgrade in Zebra
NU5 = 1

# This section may be omitted if a persistent Regtest chain state is desired
[state]
ephemeral = true

# This section may be omitted if it's not necessary to send transactions to Zebra's mempool
[rpc]
listen_addr = "0.0.0.0:18232"
```

Zebra should now include the Regtest network name in its logs, for example:

```console
2024-05-15T21:33:57.044156Z  INFO {zebrad="01633af" net="Regtest"}: zebrad::commands::start: initializing mempool
```

There are two ways to commit blocks to Zebra's state on Regtest:
- Using the `getblocktemplate` and `submitblock` RPC methods directly
- Using Zebra's experimental `internal-miner` feature

### Using Zebra's Internal Miner

Zebra can mine blocks on the Regtest network when compiled with the experimental `internal-miner` compilation feature and configured to enable to internal miner.

Add `internal_miner = true` in the mining section of its configuration and compile Zebra with `cargo build --features "internal-miner"` (or `cargo run --features "internal-miner"` to compile and start Zebra) to use the internal miner with Regtest:

```toml
[mining]
internal_miner = true
```

Zebra should now mine blocks on Regtest when it starts after a short delay (of around 30 seconds).

To confirm that it's working, look for `successfully mined a new block` messages in the logs, or that the tip height is increasing.

### Using RPC methods directly

Blocks could also be mined outside of Zebra and submitted via Zebra's RPC methods. This requires enabling the RPC server in the configuration by providing a `listen_addr` field:

```toml
[rpc]
listen_addr = "0.0.0.0:18232"
```

With Proof of Work disabled on Regtest, block templates can be converted directly into blocks with the `proposal_block_from_template()` function in the `zebra-chain` crate, serialized, hex-encoded, and then submitted via the `submitblock` RPC method.

The `submitblock` RPC method should return `{ "result": null }` for successful block submissions.

For example:

```rust
let client = RpcRequestClient::new(rpc_address);

let block_template: GetBlockTemplate = client
    .json_result_from_call("getblocktemplate", "[]".to_string())
    .await
    .expect("response should be success output with a serialized `GetBlockTemplate`");

let block_data = hex::encode(
    proposal_block_from_template(&block_template, TimeSource::default(), Network::Mainnet)?
        .zcash_serialize_to_vec()?,
);

let submit_block_response = client
    .text_from_call("submitblock", format!(r#"["{block_data}"]"#))
    .await?;

let was_submission_successful = submit_block_response.contains(r#""result":null"#);
```

See the `regtest_submit_blocks()` acceptance test as a more detailed example for using Zebra's RPC methods to submit blocks on Regtest.

When Proof of Work validation is enabled for Regtest with a low target difficulty and easy Equihash parameters, Zebra may have a `network.testnet_parameters.disable_pow` field in its configuration so that this would continue working.

Commit message:

docs: improve documentation quality and add CI checks
Add automated documentation quality checks and fix existing issues across
the codebase documentation.

Workflow changes:
- Add `docs-check.yml` workflow with link checking (lychee), spell checking
  (codespell), and markdown linting (markdownlint)
- Workflow follows project conventions: pinned action SHAs, per-job
  permissions, aggregator job pattern

Documentation fixes:
- Fix markdown linting issues (MD040 code block language specifiers,
  MD059 descriptive link text)
- Fix spelling errors across documentation files
- Add missing ARCHITECTURE.md for high-level codebase overview
- Add new developer documentation: onboarding guide, crate architecture
- Add ecosystem integration guide for users
- Add architectural decision records (ADRs) for Tower, verification, RocksDB
- Update CI/CD documentation with workflow diagram

Configuration:
- Add `.lychee.toml` for link checker configuration
- Add `.lycheecache` to `.gitignore`
- Update `.codespellrc` with domain-specific terminology

Note: Some URLs are excluded in `.lychee.toml` that require review:
- zips.z.cash PDF links (404 but linked from official Zcash site)
- Deprecated doc sites (doc.zebra.zfnd.org, doc-internal.zebra.zfnd.org)
- zcash/zips master branch links (pending main migration)
- New zebra.zfnd.org pages (pending book deployment)

book/src/user/regtest.md, after:

# Regtest with Zebra

The Regtest network in Zebra enables testing of custom functionalities in a private Testnet environment with configurable network upgrade activation heights. It allows for starting an isolated node which won't connect to any peers and currently allows for committing blocks without validating their Proof of Work (in the future, it may use a very low target difficulty and easier Equihash parameters instead of skipping Proof of Work validation altogether).

By default, Zebra activates network upgrades at height 1 on Regtest, but activation heights are configurable via the `[network.testnet_parameters.activation_heights]` section. Block height 0 is reserved for the Genesis network upgrade.

## Usage

In order to use Regtest, Zebra must be configured to run on the Regtest network. The `[mining]` section is also necessary for mining blocks, and the `[rpc]` section is necessary for using the `send_raw_transaction` RPC method to mine non-coinbase transactions onto the chain.

Relevant parts of the configuration file:

```toml
[mining]
miner_address = 't27eWDgjFYJGVXmzrXeVjnb5J3uXDM9xH9v'

[network]
network = "Regtest"

# This section may be omitted when testing only Canopy
[network.testnet_parameters.activation_heights]
# Configured activation heights must be greater than or equal to 1,
# block height 0 is reserved for the Genesis network upgrade in Zebra
NU5 = 1

# This section may be omitted if a persistent Regtest chain state is desired
[state]
ephemeral = true

# This section may be omitted if it's not necessary to send transactions to Zebra's mempool
[rpc]
listen_addr = "0.0.0.0:18232"
```

Zebra should now include the Regtest network name in its logs, for example:

```console
...  INFO {zebrad="..." net="Regtest"}: zebrad::commands::start: initializing mempool
```

There are two ways to commit blocks to Zebra's state on Regtest:

- Using the `getblocktemplate` and `submitblock` RPC methods directly
- Using Zebra's experimental `internal-miner` feature

### Using Zebra's Internal Miner

Zebra can mine blocks on the Regtest network when compiled with the experimental `internal-miner` compilation feature and configured to enable to internal miner.

Add `internal_miner = true` in the mining section of its configuration and compile Zebra with `cargo build --features "internal-miner"` (or `cargo run --features "internal-miner"` to compile and start Zebra) to use the internal miner with Regtest:

```toml
[mining]
internal_miner = true
```

Zebra should now mine blocks on Regtest when it starts after a short delay (of around 30 seconds).

To confirm that it's working, look for `successfully mined a new block` messages in the logs, or that the tip height is increasing.

### Using RPC methods directly

Blocks could also be mined outside of Zebra and submitted via Zebra's RPC methods. This requires enabling the RPC server in the configuration by providing a `listen_addr` field:

```toml
[rpc]
listen_addr = "0.0.0.0:18232"
```

With Proof of Work disabled on Regtest, block templates can be converted directly into blocks with the `proposal_block_from_template()` function in the `zebra-chain` crate, serialized, hex-encoded, and then submitted via the `submitblock` RPC method.

The `submitblock` RPC method should return `{ "result": null }` for successful block submissions.

For example:

```rust
let client = RpcRequestClient::new(rpc_address);

let block_template: GetBlockTemplate = client
    .json_result_from_call("getblocktemplate", "[]".to_string())
    .await
    .expect("response should be success output with a serialized `GetBlockTemplate`");

let block_data = hex::encode(
    proposal_block_from_template(&block_template, TimeSource::default(), Network::Mainnet)?
        .zcash_serialize_to_vec()?,
);

let submit_block_response = client
    .text_from_call("submitblock", format!(r#"["{block_data}"]"#))
    .await?;

let was_submission_successful = submit_block_response.contains(r#""result":null"#);
```

See the `regtest_submit_blocks()` acceptance test as a more detailed example for using Zebra's RPC methods to submit blocks on Regtest.

Note: Proof of Work validation is currently disabled on Regtest. If PoW validation is enabled in the future with a low target difficulty and easier Equihash parameters, a configuration option may be added to disable it.
