.github/pull_request_template.md, before:

## Motivation

<!--
Thank you for your Pull Request.
How does this change improve Zebra?
-->

### Specifications

<!--
If this PR changes consensus rules, quote them, and link to the Zcash spec or ZIP:
https://zips.z.cash/#nu5-zips
If this PR changes network behaviour, quote and link to the Bitcoin network reference:
https://developer.bitcoin.org/reference/p2p_networking.html
-->

### Designs

<!--
If this PR implements a Zebra design, quote and link to the RFC:
https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/tree/main/book/src/dev/rfcs/
-->

## Solution

<!--
Summarize the changes in this PR.
Does it close any issues?
-->

## Review

<!--
Is this PR blocking any other work?
If you want a specific reviewer for this PR, tag them here.
-->

### Reviewer Checklist

  - [ ] Will the PR name make sense to users?
    - [ ] Does it need extra CHANGELOG info? (new features, breaking changes, large changes)
  - [ ] Are the PR labels correct?
  - [ ] Does the code do what the ticket and PR says?
  - [ ] How do you know it works? Does it have tests?

## Follow Up Work

<!--
Is there anything missing from the solution?
-->

Commit message:

Add complex code or requirements to the PR template

.github/pull_request_template.md, after:

## Motivation

<!--
Thank you for your Pull Request.
How does this change improve Zebra?
-->

### Specifications

<!--
If this PR changes consensus rules, quote them, and link to the Zcash spec or ZIP:
https://zips.z.cash/#nu5-zips
If this PR changes network behaviour, quote and link to the Bitcoin network reference:
https://developer.bitcoin.org/reference/p2p_networking.html
-->

### Complex Code or Requirements

<!--
Does this PR change concurrency, unsafe code, or complex consensus rules?
If it does, ask for multiple reviewers on this PR.
-->

## Solution

<!--
Summarize the changes in this PR.
Does it close any issues?
-->

## Review

<!--
Is this PR blocking any other work?
If you want specific reviewers for this PR, tag them here.
-->

### Reviewer Checklist

  - [ ] Will the PR name make sense to users?
    - [ ] Does it need extra CHANGELOG info? (new features, breaking changes, large changes)
  - [ ] Are the PR labels correct?
  - [ ] Does the code do what the ticket and PR says?
    - [ ] Does it change concurrent code, unsafe code, or consensus rules?
  - [ ] How do you know it works? Does it have tests?

## Follow Up Work

<!--
Is there anything missing from the solution?
-->
