CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

* [Running and Debugging](#running-and-debugging)
* [Bug Reports](#bug-reports)
* [Pull Requests](#pull-requests)
* [Zebra RFCs](#zebra-rfcs)

## Running and Debugging
[running-and-debugging]: #running-and-debugging

See the [user documentation](https://zebra.zfnd.org/user.html) for details on
how to build, run, and instrument Zebra.

## Bug Reports
[bug-reports]: #bug-reports

[File an issue](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/issues/new/choose)
on the issue tracker using the bug report template.

## Pull Requests
[pull-requests]: #pull-requests

PRs are welcome for small and large changes, but please don't make large PRs
without coordinating with us via the issue tracker or Discord. This helps
increase development coordination and makes PRs easier to merge.

Check out the [help wanted][hw] or [good first issue][gfi] labels if you're
looking for a place to get started!

[hw]: https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/labels/E-help-wanted
[gfi]: https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/labels/good%20first%20issue

## Coverage Reports
[coverage-reports]: #coverage-reports

Zebra's CI currently generates coverage reports for every PR with rust's new
source based coverage feature. The coverage reports are generated by the
`coverage.yml` file.

These reports are then saved as html and zipped up into a github action's
artifact. These artifacts can be accessed on the `checks` tab of any PR, next
to the "re-run jobs" button on the `Coverage (+nightly)` CI job's tab
[example](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/1907/checks?check_run_id=2127676611).

To access a report download and extract the zip artifact then open the top
level `index.html`.

## Zebra RFCs
[zebra-rfcs]: #zebra-rfcs

Significant changes to the Zebra codebase are planned using Zebra RFCs. These
allow structured discussion about a proposed change and provide a record of
the planned design.

To make a Zebra RFC:

1. Choose a short feature name like `my-feature`.

2. Copy the `book/src/dev/rfcs/0000-template.md` file to
`book/src/dev/rfcs/drafts/xxxx-my-feature.md`.

3. Edit the template header to add the feature name and the date, but leave
the other fields blank for now.

4. Write the design! The template has a suggested list of sections that are a
useful guide.

5. Create an design PR using the RFC template.

6. After creating an RFC PR, update the RFC header and the PR description
with the PR number.

7. Make changes to the RFC in collaboration with the Zebra team.

8. When the RFC is merged, take the next available RFC number (not conflicting
with any existing RFCs or design PRs) and name the RFC file accordingly, e.g.,
`0027-my-feature.md` for number 27.

9. Make sure that `book/src/SUMMARY.md` links to the new number for the RFC.

10. After the RFC is accepted, create an issue for the implementation of the
design, and update the RFC header and PR description with the implementation
issue number.

Commit message:

Link to Conventional Commits specification (#3858)
And explain why PR titles should follow that specification.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

* [Running and Debugging](#running-and-debugging)
* [Bug Reports](#bug-reports)
* [Pull Requests](#pull-requests)
* [Zebra RFCs](#zebra-rfcs)

## Running and Debugging
[running-and-debugging]: #running-and-debugging

See the [user documentation](https://zebra.zfnd.org/user.html) for details on
how to build, run, and instrument Zebra.

## Bug Reports
[bug-reports]: #bug-reports

[File an issue](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/issues/new/choose)
on the issue tracker using the bug report template.

## Pull Requests
[pull-requests]: #pull-requests

PRs are welcome for small and large changes, but please don't make large PRs
without coordinating with us via the issue tracker or Discord. This helps
increase development coordination and makes PRs easier to merge.

Check out the [help wanted][hw] or [good first issue][gfi] labels if you're
looking for a place to get started!

Zebra follows the [convential commits][conventional] standard for the commits
merged to main. Since PRs are squashed before merging to main, the PR titles
should follow the conventional commits standard so that the merged commits
are conformant.

[hw]: https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/labels/E-help-wanted
[gfi]: https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/labels/good%20first%20issue
[conventional]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/#specification

## Coverage Reports
[coverage-reports]: #coverage-reports

Zebra's CI currently generates coverage reports for every PR with rust's new
source based coverage feature. The coverage reports are generated by the
`coverage.yml` file.

These reports are then saved as html and zipped up into a github action's
artifact. These artifacts can be accessed on the `checks` tab of any PR, next
to the "re-run jobs" button on the `Coverage (+nightly)` CI job's tab
[example](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/1907/checks?check_run_id=2127676611).

To access a report download and extract the zip artifact then open the top
level `index.html`.

## Zebra RFCs
[zebra-rfcs]: #zebra-rfcs

Significant changes to the Zebra codebase are planned using Zebra RFCs. These
allow structured discussion about a proposed change and provide a record of
the planned design.

To make a Zebra RFC:

1. Choose a short feature name like `my-feature`.

2. Copy the `book/src/dev/rfcs/0000-template.md` file to
`book/src/dev/rfcs/drafts/xxxx-my-feature.md`.

3. Edit the template header to add the feature name and the date, but leave
the other fields blank for now.

4. Write the design! The template has a suggested list of sections that are a
useful guide.

5. Create an design PR using the RFC template.

6. After creating an RFC PR, update the RFC header and the PR description
with the PR number.

7. Make changes to the RFC in collaboration with the Zebra team.

8. When the RFC is merged, take the next available RFC number (not conflicting
with any existing RFCs or design PRs) and name the RFC file accordingly, e.g.,
`0027-my-feature.md` for number 27.

9. Make sure that `book/src/SUMMARY.md` links to the new number for the RFC.

10. After the RFC is accepted, create an issue for the implementation of the
design, and update the RFC header and PR description with the implementation
issue number.
