book/src/dev/rfcs/0000-template.md, before:

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, `my_awesome_feature`)
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- Design PR: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/0000)
- Zebra Issue: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

One paragraph explanation of the feature.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected outcome?

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

Lay out explicit definitions of any terms that are newly introduced or which cause confusion during the RFC design process.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Explain the proposal as if it was already included in the project and you were teaching it to another Zebra programmer. That generally means:

- Introducing new named concepts.
- Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
- Explaining how Zebra programmers should *think* about the feature, and how it should impact the way they use Zebra. It should explain the impact as concretely as possible.
- If applicable, provide sample error messages, deprecation warnings, migration guidance, or test strategies.
- If applicable, describe the differences between teaching this to existing Zebra programmers and new Zebra programmers.

For implementation-oriented RFCs (e.g. for Zebra internals), this section should focus on how Zebra contributors should think about the change, and give examples of its concrete impact. For policy RFCs, this section should provide an example-driven introduction to the policy, and explain its impact in concrete terms.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

This is the technical portion of the RFC. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

- Its interaction with other features is clear.
- It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented, tested, monitored, and maintained.
- Corner cases are dissected by example.

The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

## Module Structure
[module-structure]: #module-structure

Describe the crate and modules that will implement the feature.

## Test Plan
[test-plan]: #test-plan

Explain how the feature will be tested, including:
* tests for consensus-critical functionality
* existing test vectors, if available
* Zcash blockchain block test vectors (specify the network upgrade, feature, or block height and network)
* property testing or fuzzing

The tests should cover:
* positive cases: make sure the feature accepts valid inputs
  * using block test vectors for each network upgrade provides some coverage of valid inputs
* negative cases: make sure the feature rejects invalid inputs
  * make sure there is a test case for each error condition in the code
  * if there are lots of potential errors, prioritise:
    * consensus-critical errors
    * security-critical errors, and
    * likely errors
* edge cases: make sure that boundary conditions are correctly handled

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this?

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

- What makes this design a good design?
- Is this design a good basis for later designs or implementations?
- What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
- What is the impact of not doing this?

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Discuss prior art, both the good and the bad, in relation to this proposal.
A few examples of what this can include are:

- For community proposals: Is this done by some other community and what were their experiences with it?
- For other teams: What lessons can we learn from what other communities have done here?
- Papers: Are there any published papers or great posts that discuss this? If you have some relevant papers to refer to, this can serve as a more detailed theoretical background.

This section is intended to encourage you as an author to think about the lessons from other projects, to provide readers of your RFC with a fuller picture.
If there is no prior art, that is fine - your ideas are interesting to us whether they are brand new or if they are an adaptation from other projects.

Note that while precedent set by other projects is some motivation, it does not on its own motivate an RFC.
Please also take into consideration that Zebra sometimes intentionally diverges from common Zcash features and designs.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the RFC process before this gets merged?
- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?
- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

Think about what the natural extension and evolution of your proposal would
be and how it would affect Zebra and Zcash as a whole. Try to use this
section as a tool to more fully consider all possible
interactions with the project and cryptocurrency ecosystem in your proposal.
Also consider how the this all fits into the roadmap for the project
and of the relevant sub-team.

This is also a good place to "dump ideas", if they are out of scope for the
RFC you are writing but otherwise related.

If you have tried and cannot think of any future possibilities,
you may simply state that you cannot think of anything.

Note that having something written down in the future-possibilities section
is not a reason to accept the current or a future RFC; such notes should be
in the section on motivation or rationale in this or subsequent RFCs.
The section merely provides additional information.

Commit message:

Update templates based on retrospectives
Updates:
- GitHub Issue templates
- GitHub PR templates
- RFC template

Focusing on:
- consensus rule / network reference sections
- design sections
- review/test checklist

Process changes:
- add new team members to RFC approval
- change RFC approval to "most of the team"

And general cleanup:
- delete docs from the checklist, because we now `warn(missing_docs)`
- shorter explanations
- consistent headings
- consistent order
- consistent formatting

book/src/dev/rfcs/0000-template.md, after:

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, `my_awesome_feature`)
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- Design PR: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/0000)
- Zebra Issue: [ZcashFoundation/zebra#0000](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

One paragraph explanation of the feature.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected outcome?

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

Lay out explicit definitions of any terms that are newly introduced or which cause confusion during the RFC design process.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Explain the proposal as if it was already included in the project and you were teaching it to another Zebra programmer. That generally means:

- Introducing new named concepts.
- Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
- Explaining how Zebra users should *think* about the feature, and how it should impact the way they use Zebra. It should explain the impact as concretely as possible.
- If applicable, provide sample error messages or test strategies.

For implementation-oriented RFCs (e.g. for Zebra internals), this section should focus on how Zebra contributors should think about the change, and give examples of its concrete impact.

For policy RFCs, this section should provide an example-driven introduction to the policy, and explain its impact in concrete terms.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

This is the technical portion of the RFC. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

- Its interaction with other features is clear.
- It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented, tested, monitored, and maintained.
- Corner cases are dissected by example.

The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

## Specifications
[specifications]: #specifications

If this design is based on Zcash consensus rules, quote them, and link to the Zcash spec or ZIP:
https://zips.z.cash/protocol/nu5.pdf#contents
https://zips.z.cash/#nu5-zips

If this design changes network behaviour, quote and link to the Bitcoin network reference or wiki:
https://developer.bitcoin.org/reference/p2p_networking.html
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Protocol_documentation

## Module Structure
[module-structure]: #module-structure

Describe the crate and modules that will implement the feature.

## Test Plan
[test-plan]: #test-plan

Explain how the feature will be tested, including:
* tests for consensus-critical functionality
* existing test vectors, if available
* Zcash blockchain block test vectors (specify the network upgrade, feature, or block height and network)
* property testing or fuzzing

The tests should cover:
* positive cases: make sure the feature accepts valid inputs
  * using block test vectors for each network upgrade provides some coverage of valid inputs
* negative cases: make sure the feature rejects invalid inputs
  * make sure there is a test case for each error condition in the code
  * if there are lots of potential errors, prioritise:
    * consensus-critical errors
    * security-critical errors, and
    * likely errors
* edge cases: make sure that boundary conditions are correctly handled

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this?

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

- What makes this design a good design?
- Is this design a good basis for later designs or implementations?
- What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
- What is the impact of not doing this?

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Discuss prior art, both the good and the bad, in relation to this proposal.
A few examples of what this can include are:

- For community proposals: Is this done by some other community and what were their experiences with it?
- For other teams: What lessons can we learn from what other communities have done here?
- Papers: Are there any published papers or great posts that discuss this? If you have some relevant papers to refer to, this can serve as a more detailed theoretical background.

This section is intended to encourage you as an author to think about the lessons from other projects, to provide readers of your RFC with a fuller picture.
If there is no prior art, that is fine - your ideas are interesting to us whether they are brand new or if they are an adaptation from other projects.

Note that while precedent set by other projects is some motivation, it does not on its own motivate an RFC.
Please also take into consideration that Zebra sometimes intentionally diverges from common Zcash features and designs.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the RFC process before this gets merged?
- What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?
- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

Think about what the natural extension and evolution of your proposal would
be and how it would affect Zebra and Zcash as a whole. Try to use this
section as a tool to more fully consider all possible
interactions with the project and cryptocurrency ecosystem in your proposal.
Also consider how the this all fits into the roadmap for the project
and of the relevant sub-team.

This is also a good place to "dump ideas", if they are out of scope for the
RFC you are writing but otherwise related.

If you have tried and cannot think of any future possibilities,
you may simply state that you cannot think of anything.

Note that having something written down in the future-possibilities section
is not a reason to accept the current or a future RFC; such notes should be
in the section on motivation or rationale in this or subsequent RFCs.
The section merely provides additional information.
